it's hard.

i actually don't know why do i wanted to build a web browser in the past. it was the spark for quanta. which is what i am developing now.

at first, i wanted it to be faster than ever. then ECMAScript spec hit hard. to be honest, i don't read the actual spec, at first i was running the test262 and by reviewing the error messages, i was shaping the engine how the spec wants. but it wasn't that late to understand that it wasn't that sustainable. so, i came across the JavaScript Engine Zoo, which has simpler (i mean it doesn't require any harness) test suite. and fixing the errors the suite giving was working well. if you wonder why the first way wasn't sustainable is simpler than you think. there are multiple versions of ECMAScript. and, if you go with the first way, not reading the spec, you are gonna hit that rock at some point. why? because if you want run the test262 and shape the engine by it's error messages, first you are gonna see that pass rate is going up. but then, you are gonna fix one test and your pass rate gonna fall down. it isn't about you did something wrong, it is because of the row of the specs. Like, to implement something on ES6 you have to make the core powerful by making ES1-ES3-ES5 well. and this was the thing what i encountered. before i found about js engines zoo, quanta was passing 17k tests on test262. then i started fixing es1-es3-es5 and it got dropped into 12k when i fixed these suites. 

let's jump into the performance side, why i wanted it to be faster than ever? i don't really know about that. it was me a year ago. and the funny side is, i was wanting both speed and efficiency. like, i laugh at my self when i think about the past of quanta. my plans about quanta for now is, i don't try to make it fastest, i am trying to make it most efficient via good performance in terms of speed. why tho? because it won't change anything if i do it faster than every engine exists (it is probably impossible to do it alone btw), for example, there is huge difference in benchmarks between v8 & spidermonkey. but users don't feel it on web browsing. because dom itself is very heavy and makes everything slower. so i want make it fast (not the fastest) & very efficient engine. but these plans can be change btw as the topic of next paragraph. and last words of this section gonna be; i sometimes think about why the engineers of v8 or javascript core or anything else don't do this, it is basically their trade-offs. they want speed. they can find new efficient ways. but making the engine more efficient, slows it down. so, its easy to judge the book by it's cover, but more you read it you are gonna understand what was it about. 

OKAY, now lets dive into my "web browser" project. its name is solar. it was my dream for 6-7 years. its still my dream, but it isn't the main thing that on my life, on my projects. why? ee, its hard to build a web browser from scratch by yourself. so i took it from my desk and put in the shelves. it can be made in future, but not in near future. because if i wanted to do it, i have to make the quanta tooooooooooo fast, and yk, making something too fast is not the best way to do it sometimes. so i gave quanta multiple years, it was part of it at the start, but it is now whole different project. so my main goal now is finish quanta and maybe do different project then web browser with quanta — but its web related.

i wanted to write this blog post, because i started designing memory management of the quanta and when i go very deep, i start thinking about my future, because more i think deeper, more it gets complex, and i feel like it wont finish ever. i am highschool student now, i dont have to worry about taxes, bills, but i have to worry about my future, and sometimes thinking so deep puts me into way different emotional state. so i thought that if i write something that clears my mind, maybe i can get relaxed...

i don't where quanta will be in five years. but today, i'm still building it.

